This is a video about a future. Not _the_ future but _a_ future.

The year is 2028. Machine learning algorithms and powerful computing hardware are at the breaking point of both mathematics and physics. After years of hard work and research, computers are the most powerful that they will ever be, and artificial intelligence researchers are using these computers at their absolute limits. Some ML algorithms developed during this past era include finding specific errors in genetic data, the deployment of perfect self-driving cars across the nation, the perfect deep faking of pictures and video and, funnily enough, the perfect detection of these deep fakes. Each of these algorithms have rocked their respective fields to their core, but the one we care about is Helmholtz and its Crime Propensity Index or CPI for short.

ML algorithms revolutionized many fields, and the United States justice system was no exception. After conquering biology, transportation, and ironically, itself, the algorithms decided to conquer crime next. In 2029 research efforts were focused on preventing crime from happening, ever. It was a mighty and lofty goal, maybe even foolish, but if the algorithms could stop disease on a genetic level then surely they  can fix a broken justice system too. And by 2030 the first version of the justice algorithm was released. Its name was Helmholtz, and the algorithm was hailed as the latest and greatest in machine learning research.

Before Helmholtz, measuring an individual's likelihood of committing a crime was based on surveys. A deep dive into a person's past behaviors, and an understanding of their psychology and circumstances was necessary to measure this likelihood of criminality, but even then there was ambiguity. There were many different surveys, many different questions to ask across different veins of research, and many different interpretations as to whether or not a past event was prophetic to future violence.

But Helmholtz wasn't ambiguous. By reading the neurological signals in a person and cross-examining this data with the Federal Genetic Database, the propensity for an individual to commit a crime was calculated. A human goes in, a number, the CPI, comes out. Like most other algorithms, the way Helmholtz derived these numbers was a mystery, but trust in the algorithms was absolute. After all, if science says that Helmholtz is fair, how can we disagree?

Helmholtz was used very sparingly at first. Though trust in the algorithms was absolute, deployment of these algorithms always took time. From 2030 to 2032, Helmholtz's CPI derivations were only used as evidence of a crime rather than the deciding factor of guilty vs. innocent, but this two year period was necessary to get more data and fine tune Helmholtz even more, and to also prove the algorithm's worth. In a vast majority of cases, Helmholtz sided with the winning side of a court battle. And whenever Helmholtz was wrong, the individual would eventually prove Helmholtz correct a few months later. The biggest news story of 2031 was when Helmholtz gave a ridiculously high CPI to an innocent man and trust in the algorithms were questioned. The biggest news story of 2032, however, was when that same innocent man murdered 15 people in one of the deadliest massacres in United States history. It turns out that Helmholtz was just early.

The year 2033 is when crime and punishment was flipped on its head. Judges were replaced with Helmholtz and now trials last several seconds instead of weeks, months, or even years. A human goes in, the CPI comes out. Individuals with high CPI's are automatically found guilty whereas individuals with low CPI's were released. Because Helmholtz reigned supreme and the CPI was viewed as an indisputable unit, no one was worried about injustices in this new system. If Helmholtz was wrong, Helmholtz would be right eventually, so we might as well just throw them into jail. Trust in the algorithms was absolute after all.

What no one expected is how Helmholtz would be used during the inequality riots of 2035. As cities burned, the United States government was getting more and more desperate to squash the protests. Even if protestors were caught and brought to trial, Helmholtz just deemed them innocent and protestors were dismissed immediately. Rather than wasting time bringing people into the courthouses just to release them again, Helmholtz was modified to run on portable hardware and brought out to the streets. What the United States government found out, however, was that protestors were getting guilty verdicts now rather than the innocent verdicts at the courts. Suddenly, they had a weapon.

Protestors were incarcerated en masse due to high CPI scores. This led to more protests which led to more arrests leading to a deadly cycle of mass incarceration. Everyone blamed the government for bringing fake Helmholtz devices that outputted false CPI scores to the protests, but no one could prove it. Trust in the algorithms was so strong, that no one believed the government when they said that the original Helmholtz algorithm was on these devices. After an independent study corroborated the government's claims, public opinion of the protests quickly shifted from overwhelmingly in favor to vehemently opposed, the protests ended soon after.

With the success of portable Helmholtz devices during the protests, portable Helmholtz devices were deployed nation-wide as a precautionary measure for crime. They were fitted into video cameras, streetlights, and doorways, sniffing out crime before it even happened. Whenever someone's CPI spiked, they were taken away. Helmholtz had deemed them too dangerous to live in society.

No one questioned these devices. No one bothered to check the original Helmholtz papers to see if the portable hardware was even compatible with the algorithm. No one questioned why Helmholtz suddenly outputted different CPIs when put into a portable device as opposed to a specially built computer.  No one ran diagnostics on these portable devices to see if the results matched between different machines. No one did anything really to oppose the new Helmholtz devices. Everyone accepted their CPIs, even "criminals" because Helmholtz said so. Because after all, the algorithms are absolute.
